I already wrote that a person is open to the world. In this he differs from animals, which are not open to the world, but are tied to the environment specific to each species. This environment contains what corresponds to the set of instincts inherent in this species. On the contrary, human existence is characterized by overcoming the boundaries of the habitat of the species Homo sapiens. A person strives and goes beyond its limits, into the world, and really reaches it - a world filled with other people and communication with them, meanings and their realization.
This position is fundamentally opposed to those theories of motivation, which are based on the principle of homeostasis. These theories portray a person as if he were a closed system. According to these theories, a person is mainly concerned with maintaining or restoring internal balance, for which he, in turn, needs tension reduction. Ultimately, this is precisely what is seen as the goal of fulfilling drives and satisfying needs. As Charlotte Buehler rightly noted, “from the very first formulations of the principle of pleasure in Freud and up to the newest versions of stress relief and the principle of homeostasis, the invariable ultimate goal of all activity throughout the life of an individual was to restore his inner balance.” The principle of pleasure serves the principle of homeostasis; in turn, the principle of reality serves the pleasure principle. According to Freud, the purpose of the reality principle is to provide pleasure, albeit delayed.
Von Bertalanffy was able to show that even in biology it is no longer possible to rely on the principle of homeostasis. Goldstein, relying on materials from the study of brain pathology, presented confirmation of his thesis that the desire for homeostasis is not a characteristic of a normal organism, but a sign of pathology. Only in case of illness does the body seek to avoid stress in any way. In psychology, Olpert opposed the theory of homeostasis, pointing out that she "failed to understand the nature of true attraction", a characteristic feature of which "is its resistance to equilibrium: stress is not reduced, but maintained." Thus, the principle of homeostasis cannot serve as a sufficient basis for explanations of human behavior. In particular, this approach turns out to be blind to such human phenomena as creativity, striving for values ​​and meaning.
As for the pleasure principle, I will go even further in my criticism. It is my belief that the pleasure principle ultimately destroys itself. The more a person strives for pleasure, the more he moves away from the goal. In other words, the very "pursuit of happiness" interferes with happiness. This self-destructive property of the desire for pleasure underlies many sexual neuroses. Over and over again, the psychiatrist has to observe how both orgasm and potency are violated when they turn into a goal. This is especially the case when, as is often the case, excessive desire is combined with excessive attention. Hyperintention and hyperreflexia, as I call them, are more likely to generate neurotic patterns of behavior.
Normally, pleasure is never the goal of human endeavor. It is and should remain the result, or rather, a side effect of achieving the goal. Achieving a goal creates a reason for happiness. In other words, if there is a reason for happiness, happiness flows out of it automatically and spontaneously. And so there is no need to strive for happiness, there is no need to worry about it, if we have a reason for it.
Moreover, you cannot strive for it. To the extent that a person makes happiness the object of his aspirations, he inevitably makes it the object of his attention. But by doing so he loses sight of the reasons for happiness, and happiness slips away.
The emphasis that Freudian psychology places on the pleasure principle can be compared with the emphasis that Adlerian psychology places on the need for social position. And this desire, however, also turns out to be self-destructive, since a person who expresses and manifests his need for social status will sooner or later be deprived of it and dismissed as a careerist.
One experience from my own experience can help illustrate this point. If any of my twenty-three books were successful, it was the one I originally intended to publish anonymously. It was only after the completion of the manuscript that my friends persuaded me to allow the publisher to put my name on the title page. Is it not surprising that this particular book, which I wrote with the conviction that it would not bring, could not bring me success and fame, it was this book that was really successful. Let this serve as an illustration and edification for young authors to listen to their scientific or literary conscience and not think about success. Success and happiness should come on their own, and the less you think about them, the more likely it is. Ultimately, the need for a social position or the desire for power, on the one hand, and the principle of pleasure, or, as it might be called, the desire for pleasure, on the other hand, are only derivatives of the primary, main interest of man - his desire to the meaning. This is one of the three basic concepts that logotherapy is built on. What I call the pursuit of meaning can be defined as the basic human desire to find and realize meaning and purpose.
For what reason, then, do I call the drive for power and the drive for pleasure merely derivatives of the drive for meaning? Simply enjoyment, not being the goal of human aspirations, is really a consequence of the realization of meaning. And power, not being an end in itself, really acts as a means of achieving this goal: for a person to carry through his life his striving for meaning, a necessary prerequisite for this, generally speaking, is a certain degree of power, for example, financial capabilities. Only if the initial striving for the realization of meaning is frustrated, a person is either content with power, or aims at pleasure.
Both happiness and success are only surrogates of fulfillment, therefore the pleasure principle, as well as the desire for power, are only derivatives of the desire for meaning. Since their development is based on a neurotic distortion of primary human motivation, it is understandable that the founders of the classical schools of psychotherapy, who had to deal with neurotics, created their theories of motivation, taking as a basis those typically neurotic aspirations that they observed in their patients.